elhe taifin i sohon bonio juwan uyuci aniya	the year of the Yellow Monkey, nineteenth year of Kangxi.
aniya biyai ice inenggi	On the first day of the first month,
bayara uksin i beye giyade hehe adali miyamifi	The bayara guards and the armored soldiers were in the streets, in women's clothes and make-up
ucun be uculeme efihe	enjoying themselves singing the song.
mini dolo sakdasa be gvnime alixaha	In my heart, I felt sad thinking about [my] old folks.
mini gamara yaya jaka be gemu dasataha	I prepared all the provisions to take with me.
tere inenggi mini jakvn morin hvlhabufi	This same day eight horses of mine were stolen.
mini dolo alixame	I felt sad and distraught.
neneme genehe bayara be acafi aliha cooha be acabufi emu meyen obuha	We caught up with the bayara troops that had set off earlier and, joining the Manchu-Mongol cavalry, we formed a squadron.
cacari de tebufi	made us sit in [his] tent.
sain gisun i necihiyere de be yertehe	He comforted us with good words, but we felt ashamed.
bi booi juse be gaxan de unggifi eye feteme handu baifi gajifi	I sent the family boy-servants to the village. Digging up pits they found the unhusked rice, and brought it [to me].
na be sangga arafi bele niohuhe	Then they dug holes into the ground, and pounded the rice.
cooha kutule be irgen be nungnembi seme gemu karun ci ume tucibure seme fafun i bithe selgiyehe	because the troops and servants were harming the civilian population, a legal decree was issued to the effect that nobody was allowed to leave his post.
bi orhoi tatan araha	I made a grass shelter.
bi eye fetebume handu baifi bele niohuhe	I ordered people to dig a storage pit, take the unhusked rice, and pound it to get husked rice.
mini beye cooha be kadalame dobori dulime keremu ulan weilehe	I was put personally in charge of the troops to construct during the night shift a camp wall and a moat.
coohai urse gasaha	All the soldiers complained.
mini beye dobori inenggi akv uksilehei jucelehe	I wore my armor night and day and stood guard.
niowanggiyan tu be juleri sindafi	He lined up the Green Standard troops in front.
ibeme poo sindame	moved forward firing cannon.
hvlha uthai fondolome latunjifi	The rebels immediately rushed forward breaking through.
niowanggiyan tu alime muterakv axxame	The Green Standard troops were not able to hold [them] and vacillated.
gulu suwayan gulu fulgiyan juwe hontoho fakcame angga arame ba buhe	The Plain Yellow and the Plain Red [Banners] broke into two halves, creating an opening.
tuwaci jebele galai baru siribume kubuhe lamun hvlhai hiyahan i hanci ilinaha	One could see that as our western flank was being pressed on, the Bordered Blue [Banner] was being pushed up against the rebels' chevaux-de-frise.
tuwaci uju meyen i cooha sufan be birebufi	Following that, the soldiers of the first column were attacked by the elephants.
sufan halgime jai meyen i cooha de nikenjihe be meni geren i gabtara de sirdan sengge bula i adali	As the elephants closed in on the encircled soldiers of the second column, the arrows shot by all of my men looked like the quills of a porcupine.
sufan de hadara jakade sufan burulame alin i baru genehe mini dolo faijuma seme gvnime tuksitehe	The elephants fled towards the hills [but] I was greatly alarmed and had a strange feeling.
musei cooha inu afahakv	Our soldiers also did not attack
ing de bederefi	returned to the encampment
keremu be akdulame tuwakiyaha	protected by strengthening the ramparts.
juwan ninggun i yamji	On the evening of the sixteenth
ergide kaicame cargide burdeme hvlha be burgibuha	As they drew closer to the bandits, they frightened them yelling here and blowing the conch there.
dobori dulime ing de bederehe	we returned to the camp in the middle of the night.
juwe tumen isire hvlha be ambarame gidafi waha	defeated and killed a mass of up to 20,000 rebel soldiers.
juwan ninggun i dobori hvlha burulafi fargame amcafi ambula waha	when the rebels fled on the night of the sixteenth, we pursued them capturing and killing many.
bi ere ganio kai sehe	I said that this was really extraordinary.
ice ninggun be jurafi be sa be dulefi	On the sixth we set out and passed Bosa.
juwan emude birai dalin de ibefi	On the eleventh we advanced to the bank of the river.
bi uksilehei fiyanjilaha	I stood ready in the rear guard in full armor.
juwan nadan de jakvn gvsa meni meni cuwan dendeme gaifi sasari doome	On the seventeenth each of the Eight Banners obtained its share of boats and crossed the river all together.
mini beye dobon dulin de dooha	I myself crossed in the middle of the night.
juwan jakvn de jurafi tofohon ba yabufi tataha	Having set out on the eighteenth, we camped after a march of 15 li.
juwan uju de gvsin sunja ba yabufi tataha	On the nineteenth we camped after marching for 35 li.
orin de orin sunja ba yabufi	On the twentieth we marched 25 li,
bi donjifi ere icihiyahangge waka kai sehe	I heard this and thought that this was not the way to keep order.
juwe inenggi indefi giran baibuha	We rested for two days and recovered the corpses.
morin orin funcehe bucehe	Over twenty horses died.
umai araha akv ofi bi inenggidari omimbi hehe be inu uncafi morin udaha	Since there was absolutely nothing that could be done I drank every day and even sold a woman to buy horses.
orin de gvsai ejen jiha efire arki nure omire loho asharakv oci nambuha be tuwame weile arambi seme fafulaha	On the twentieth, Lieutenant-general issued an order that those caught in gambling, drinking alcohol, and not wearing swords, would be punished.
juwan emude beging ni hoton de ambarame na axxaha ambula hiya seme donjifi	On the eleventh we heard of a big earthquake in the city of Beijing, and of a great drought.
bi ambula tuksitehe	I became very worried.
gvwa hendume juken sehe	The others said it was just right.
orin jakvn de jalan i janggin fulu seme mimbe nakabuha	On the twenty-eighth, because there were too many colonels, I was discharged from that post.
janggin cooha morin be baicafi ekiyefi uncehen tolome orho liyoo gaibure jakade geren gemu ambula tooha	After officers and soldiers checked the number of horses which had decreased. Because [Ganduhai] then allotted fodder on the basis of the number of tails, everybody was scolding vehemently.
uheri cooha be ilan meyen banjibufi	They divided the whole army into three squadrons
geren cooha gemu ihan emke juwe udaha	All the soldiers bought one or two cows.
ihan orin yan morin ninju nadanju yan de uncambi	Cattle were sold at 20 ounces per head, and horses at sixty or seventy.
mini morin damu duin funcefi	I only had four horses left.
duin tanggv yan de duin morin ninggun ihan udaha	With 400 ounces of silver I bought four horses and six head of cattle.
kutule morin umesi hibcan ofi ambula alixame joboho	Because horses and servants were so few, I was worried and distressed.
arbun loho i adali da i ergi fulahvn sabumbi	One could see that in shape it resembled a sword, and it was red at the base.
niyalma tome diyan i baru dosici ehe seme gisurehe	Everyone said that if it advanced towards the imperial palace it would be a bad omen.
orin ba yabufi tataha	after a march of 20 li set up camp.
cibume juwe dobori dulifi	we squeezed through it for two nights.
juwan nadan de teni angga be tucike	On the seventeenth we finally came out of the mountain pass.
ninggun tanggv babe juwan duin inenggi dobori dulime yabufi	Proceeding at night we covered 600 li in fourteen days.
hvlha burulahabi	The rebels had fled.
kvwaran i tome yooni heliyen congkixakv arafi eye feteme handu baifi bele niohumbi	Everyone in the encampment was making pounders and pestles, digging holes, and looking for unhusked rice to pound into husked rice.
ice sunja de tusy i da dahaha	On the fifth the leader of local chiefs surrendered.
je ma tang ni bade juwan emu inenggi indehe	We rested in Zhaimadang for eleven days.
orin de yan yang tang ci jurafi bujan i dorgi be yabume xun be saburakv	On the twentieth we set out from Yanyangtang and marched through a forest where sunlight could not be seen.
tofohon bai dubede yarume tataha	After marching in close order for 15 li we set up camp.
golo hoton i sunja tanggv morin akv cooha de inu ihan sime bufi	500 infantry soldiers from the provincial capital must also be provided with cattle.
amala elhe yabukini	These shall march behind at a slower pace.
orin ninggude uju meyen i cooha juraka	On the twenty-sixth the troops of the first squadron left.
cooha morin yarubufi cibume ilihai juwan ba yabuhakv yamjifi	Soldiers and horses were all pressed one against the other. We had not proceeded 10 li when it became dark.
tatara ba baharakv ofi birai dan i yonggan de tatafi	Because it was impossible to find a place to camp, we pitched our tents in the sand on a bend of the river.
edun de yonggan furgime muke nure udu gin ulgiyan emke udafi aniya araha	The sand was being lifted up in the wind. We bought a few pints of water and spirits, and one pig to celebrate the New Year.
bi dolori akame ureme damu sakdasa be kidume gvnime jibehun i dolo songgoho	In my heart I felt sad and disconsolate and, longing for my old people, I wept under the blanket.
tuwaci mukei hirgen moo i subehe de axxan kemuni takahabi	Upon observation, one could often detect movements on the riverbed and in the branches of trees.
jai inenggi jurafi ilihai yamjime emu juwe maikan arara bade yarume tatame	On the next day we departed and, as soon as night started to fall, we filed into a place where only one or two tents could stand, and set up camp.
tofohon de jurafi	On the fifteenth we set out again
niyalmai bethe yooni fukanafi yabuci ojorakv	The men's feet were covered with blisters, and could not go any further.
tuwaci waha hvlha emke emken i bi	One could see one by one the bodies of the rebels who had been killed.
juwan nadan de yafahan orin ba yabufi	On the seventeenth we marched 20 li on foot.
tuwaci hvlha dahafi irgen i hehe juse be hoton i baru gajime jimbi	One could see that the rebels who had surrendered were coming towards the city taking the common people's women and children.
bi teni toktoho ba seme bakcilaha kvwaran i da hose i baru gisurefi	I thought that was just the right place to stop, and said so to Hose, who is the head of the encampment that faces mine.
hoton be dulefi tataha	We set up camp after we passed the city.
juwan jakvn de jurafi	On the eighteenth we set out.
tuwaci ba xehun onco	The area appeared wide and barren.
julergi meyen be amcame dobori dulime ninju ba yabuha	We joined up with the squadron in front and, marching all night, we covered 60 li.
uheri nukte de emu nirui emte morin akv cooha be werifi cimari gemu uksilefi bira doombi seme selgiyehe	we were ordered to leave one soldier without horse from each company with the entire baggage train, and to cross the river on the next day wearing armor.
xehun babe gvsin ba yabufi hvlhai ing de nikenefi	after a march of 30 li over a barren territory we approached the rebels' encampment.
ba ambula ehe afaci ojorakv ofi uthai cooha be gocika	That place was a really wicked one, and could not be attacked. Therefore the general withdrew the army.
ging hecen ci giyamun ilibume jihe icihiyara hafan walda se isinjifi	Departmental Director Walda and others, who had come from the capital to build relay stations, arrived
dergici hafan coohai sain be fonjiha	An imperial dispatch, in which the emperor inquired about the well-being of officers and soldiers.
alin bigan be sektefi orin sunja ba yabufi afara arame hvlhai ing be fehufi kimcime	We went through the mountain and the wilderness, and after a march of 25 li, feigning an attack, we closed in on the rebels' camp.
tuwaci cin i dere be afaci ojorakv	We realized that it was impossible to attack it frontally.
juwe biyai ice de uheri cooha be baksan baksan jergi jergi faidabufi	On the first day of the second month the whole army was ordered to line up by units and ranks.
ibefi afara babe toktobume tuwaha	We advanced, and tried to decide the place we were going to attack.
musei coohai hvsun ambula etuhun	Our troops are mighty and powerful.
niowanggiyan tu be juleri manju cooha be amala duin ursu faidabufi	He also ordered the Green Standard troops to line up in front, and the Manchu troops in the rear, arranged in four echelons.
gaitai talman talmafi hanci niyalma be ishunde saburakv	Suddenly a thick fog rose and even men [standing] close-by could not see one another.
musei cooha dosifi poo jilgan be lakcarakv donjimbi	Our troops advanced, and we could hear the inces- sant sound of artillery.
bi tu be gaifi feksime genefi alin i anggai dolo dosifi tuwaci hvlha ingci tucifi hiyahan kalka sufan be faidafi musei niowanggiyan tu baru afambi	Carrying a flag I ran forward, entered the mountain pass, and saw rebels who, had come out of the encampment, lined up chevaux-de-frise, shields and elephants, and joined battle with our Green Standard troops.
poo miyoocan i jilgan turi tashara adali na durgembi	The fire from cannon and muskets sounded like frying beans, the earth was shaking.
na ujelere gese	It was as if the earth itself was falling down.
ing ni hvlha keremu sangga ci miyoocan sindambi	The rebels in the camp were firing their muskets from holes in the ramparts.
cooha be bargiyafi bederere de tuwaci giran hetu undu bigan de sektefi	When the troops were recalled and returned to the camp, one could see corpses covering that wilderness in all directions.
senggi nade eyembi	Blood was flowing on the ground.
ice ilan de indefi	On the third day we rested.
ice ninggude dabagan dabame dobori dulime gvsin ba yabuha	On the sixth we climbed over a mountain ridge and, marching overnight, covered 30 li.
amba edun dame yonggan buraki de yasa sohime yabuci ojorakv	a formidable wind rose, and because the sand was getting into our eyes, it became impossible to proceed.
ice jakvn de amba edun dame	On the eighth a strong wind blew,
buraki de yasa neici ojorakv	it was impossible to open our eyes because of the dust.
hvlha aifini burulahabi	The rebels had run away earlier.
bele gaime ilan inenggi indehe	We seized the rice and rested for three days.
beise i bayara kaidu moringga amcanjiha	A single horseman of Beise's guards caught up with us.
xang ban kiyoo de isinafi tuwaci hvlha ing be waliyafi burulahabi	When [we] reached Shangban Bridge [we] saw that the rebels had abandoned the camp and fled.
juwan jakvn de kalka ara niowanggiyan tu isinjiha manggi hoton be afambi seme selgiyehe	On the eighteenth an order was issued that said: 'Prepare your shields. After the Green Standard troops have arrived attack the city
tuwaci hoton akdun afaci ojorakv	Looking at it, the city appeared strong and impregnable,
alirame ing ilifi dobori dulime keremu ulan weile seme selgiyefi	set up our encampment along the mountain side, and received orders to make ramparts and moats during the night.
uju meyen elemangga hvlhai uncehen be meiteme hoton i baru untuhun be baime dosika	The first squadron, moreover, advanced to cut off the tail of the bandits, and to seek an opening towards the city.
musei niowanggiyan tu hvlhai baru afame poo miyoocan i jilgan tur seme lakcarakv	When our Green Standard troops charged the enemy, the roaring sound of cannons and muskets was incessant,
xan ureme ambula goidaha	lasted for such a long time that the ears became used to it
meni jai meyen i cooha yooni axxaha bata be gidame dosika	The troops of our second squadron attacked those enemies that had already been completely routed.
hebei amban hife kubuhe fulgiyan musei gvsa be hvlafi tere axxara unde udu kuren i kiyoo gaxan be ejelehe bata be gida seme joriha	Councilor Hife called aloud for the Bordered Red Banner and our own Banner, and ordered: 'Crush those rebel detachments that have not been routed and are still in control of the bridge and village'
bi emhun birai dalin de ilifi tuwaci musei cooha niyalma emdubei feye bahambi	I reached the bank of the river by myself, and saw that our soldiers were being continuously wounded.
hife niyalma takvrafi yafahan dosi seme	Hife sent a man with the order to advance on foot,
jing sirdan jafara burgin de hvlhai amargi baksan sumburxambi	as soon as we got within shooting range, the rearguard of the rebels was in disarray.
bayara emu hvlha be gabtara de gemu ilifi sujuhe	when a bayara guard shot a rebel with an arrow, they all stood up and fled.
juwe hvlha waliyaha jangkv be gaifi buceki seme sacime dosinjiha	Two rebels got hold of long swords that had been abandoned, and, indifferent to death, came forward slashing.
amasi tuwaci uksin dengse ekcin be tafame muterakv	Looking behind me, I saw that armored soldier Dengse could not climb onto the bank.
dengse tuheke bi tere hvlha be gabtame tuhebuhe	As Dengse fell off the horse, I shot the rebel, and made him fall down.
geli emu hvlha be we waha be sarkv	Who killed the other rebel, I do not know.
hoton i ningguci poo sindambi	They were also firing cannons from the top of the wall.
cooha bargiyara buren i jilgan be donjime musei cooha uthai yooni amasi bederehe	As our soldiers heard the bugle signal for the withdrawal of the troops, they immediately turned back all together.
ulan keremu xanggafi ing gurifi afara wan ara seme selgiyehe	Once ramparts and moats had been prepared, we moved the encampment, and we were ordered to make assault ladders.
orin ninggude wan arafi dobori dulime ing ni keremu sahaha	On the twenty-sixth, after the ladders had been made, we dug a moat during the night around the encampment.
hoton be akvmbume kara ulan feteme deribuhe	we started to erect ramparts around the city.
juwan de beise i emgi kara ba be dendefi ulan fetehe	On the tenth we divided up the perimeter of the siege with the Beise's, and dug a moat.
gvsin de hoton be kara keremu ulan xanggafi geli ing gurihe	On the thirteenth we completed the construction of fortifications and moats around the city, and moved the encampment again.
irgen i boo be efulefi boo aranuha	The houses of the civilians had been destroyed, and we built houses.
ba dendefi ing ni ulan keremu weilehe	After dividing up the area, we made moats and ramparts the encampment.
ice nadan de bi harkasi nimeme	On the seventh I fell ill with fever.
ambarame agafi ing mukede gaibufi	After a very heavy rain our camp was flushed away by the water,
tatara ba akv	no place to pitch tents.
mini beye nimere ujen	My illness grew worse.
kutule se gemu nimeme ofi ujen coohai janggin mimbe inu tatan de gamaha bihe	Since my servants had also taken ill, the Hanjun Adjutant had me carried to his tent.
ilan ursu ulan fetehe	erected a three-layer rampart.
niowanggiyan tu de afabufi beise i manju cooha be gocika	Then he assigned the Green Standard troops, and withdrew the Manchu troops of the Beise.
ineku inenggi keremu dorgi de kaicara jilgan be donjifi	On the same day a loud noise was heard from inside the ramparts.
dergici hafan coohai sain be fonjiha	on behalf of the emperor inquired about the health of officers and soldiers.
nadan biyai juwan de mini beye mangga ofi iliha	On the tenth day of the seventh month, I felt stronger and could stand up.
nimekulehe edelehe hafan cooha be baicafi	The officers and soldiers who were ill or disabled were also examined
ufaraha janggin coohai giran be gala de emte janggin gvsa de sunja uksin be tucibufi ging hecen i baru jurambuha	All the corpses of dead officers and soldiers were removed by one officer from each wing and five armored soldiers from each banner, then were sent to the capital.
tuwaci cira boco wasifi yafahan niyalma labdu	Looking at them, their faces showed an emaciated complexion, and many soldiers were on foot.
fonjici hoton i dorgi yuyume niyalma i yali jembi sembi	When they were interrogated, they said that inside the city were starving and eating human flesh.
irgen ambula yuyume bucehe	Many people starved to death.
gvwa habxaci donjiha akv	If others have filed a complaint, I am not aware of it.
juwan biyai juwan de ibefi	On the tenth of the tenth month we advanced.
bi inenggidari genehe	I went every day
ulan keremu xanggafi kubuhe fulgiyan kubuhe lamun i ing gurifi tuwakiyaha	Once the fortifications were completed, we moved the encampments of the Bordered Red and Bordered Blue Banners, and guarded them.
niyalma gemu dalda de boo araha	The people all built their houses in concealed spots.
bi emhun meni meni giyan bi seme xehun bai den bade boo araha	With everyone having one's own idea, only I built my dwelling on a high spot in a barren area.
niyalma tome bucetei hacihiyambi	every man was crushed to death.
hoton i hvlha poo miyoocan geretele xorgime sindame	The rebels inside the city fired the muskets and cannons until dawn.
muhaliyan juleri amala emdubei tuhebi	Projectiles were falling ceaselessly in front and behind.
musei niyalma morin poo miyoocan de ambula kokiraha	Many of my men and horses were injured by the shots.
jai inenggi ulan keremu uthai xanggaha	The next day moats and ramparts had been fully completed.
cooha kutule se holtome hoton de dosifi	Soldiers and civilians stealthily entered the city
yuyuhe hehe juse be hvlhame ambula tucibuhe	stole and brought out a great number of starving women and children.
boo se de gemu bayara janggisa be tuwakiyabuha	ordered the officers of the Guards regiment to guard all the residencies.
geli buyarame suje etuku i jergi jaka buhe	Miscellaneous silks, clothes, and other things were also awarded.
orin de suje buhe	On the twentieth silk was bestowed.
orin duin de narhvn jaka be icihiyame wajifi	By the twenty-fourth they had finished distributing even the smallest things.
meiren i janggisa be gocifi	The brigadier-generals were withdrawn.
duka be bayara janggin tuwakiyaha	The bayara guard was on guard duty at one gate.
poo i okto emu hunio fushufi	a bucket of gunpowder exploded.
hoton i dergi ilan giyan i boo juce i niyalma juwan baran akv deyehe	Three houses of the eastern part of the city and ten people at a guard post went up in the air and vanished completely.
coohai urse kutule se dahaha liyoo dung ni nikan i anggasi hehe sargan juse be holtome sargan gaimbi seme gainufi	Common soldiers and servants managed to get the widows and daughters of Chinese people from Liaodong who had surrendered by deceitfully telling them that they were going to marry them
tese hoton ci ambula tucibuhe	they took many out of the city.
giran be afabufi beging ni baru jurambuha	the corpses were handed and were sent back to Beijing
cooha be jakvn meyen banjibuha	the troops were organized into eight squadrons.
bi gisurefi uju meyen oho	Upon my request I was assigned to the first squadron.
aniyai biyai juwan de jurambumbi seme selgiyefi	It was announced that [the army] would set out on the tenth of the first month.
elhe taifin i sahaliyan indahvn orin emuci aniya aniyai ice inenggi	On New Year's Day of the twenty-first year of Kangxi, year of the Black Dog
ice nadan de jurgan ci unggihe bithe de dahaha hvlha de anggala bele fu ume bure uthai coohai sasa gajime jio sehebi	On the seventh a dispatch from the Ministry arrived, which said: 'Do not give the common people's rice and wheat to the surrendered rebels, but bring them back at once together with the army.
yaya jaka gemu hvda wesifi cooha umesi mohofi	The price of everything went up and the soldiers were reduced to extreme poverty.
hvda i niyalma ambula wabuha	many merchants were killed.
bi niyalma tucibufi durire hvlhara be jafabumbi	I shall send out people, they will to arrest those who plunder and steal
ashan i da foron jeku ciyanliyang hafirahvn seme gisurefi	Sub-Chancellor of the Great Secretariat Foron said that food and revenues were scarce.
mini morisa be ganabufi jurambi serede hvlha habxafi	I had my horses fetched and was about to depart, when the rebel submitted a complaint.
tere geli nakaha morin be adun de benebuhe	it was revoked again, and I had the horses sent back to the herd.
dele ambula urgunjembi damu ebxeme ambasa be acaki sembi seme sain hese wasimbuha seme alaha	A favorable edict was issued and told: "The Emperor greatly rejoices and he only wishes to meet the high officials as soon as possible."
siyan ioi se habxara jakade geli jurara be nakafi morin be adun de unggihe	Because of a complaint brought up by Xian Yu and others the departure was again revoked, and the horses sent back to the herd.
geren gemu toktohon akv seme gasaha	Everyone was angry that there was no fixed decision.
orin nadan de hebe acafi	On the twenty-seventh a council was held
tuwaci coohai gajiha hehe juse udu minggan bi	One could see that the women and children taken by the soldiers were several thousands.
bayara be beise gaifi morin ulebumbi	The Beise led the bayara guards to feed the horses.
tese wei de isinafi boo dendefi orin inenggi orin sunja morin i orho liyoo gaifi morin ulebuhe	after they reached the Garrison they allocated the billets and gave twenty days' worth of fodder for twenty-five horses; then the horses were fed.
bi inenggidari tanggilame alixara be tokobuha	Every day I allowed worries to be released and hit
alin dabagan labdu	there are many mountain peaks
irgen komso	the people are few
mukden i goloi cooha be facuhvn seme manju gvsa de kamcibuha	The troops from Mukden were in disarray, and were therefore combined with the Manchu Banners
muse emu inenggi indehe	we rested for a day.
miyoose tusy labdu tacin umesi oshon ehe	There are many chieftains of the Miao, whose customs are cruel and wicked in the extreme.
dobori gaitai amba aga hungkereme agafi	During the night suddenly a heavy rain poured in great quantity.
alin i muke wasinjifi	The mountain torrents came flowing down
maikan be tobgiya gese muke birefi	water rushed into the tents up to the knees.
mini etuku bele jibehun sisehe gemu muke ci sekiyeme gaifi usihiyere jakade muse juwe inenggi indefi tuwa de walgiyame olhobuha	I took my clothes, food, quilt, and mattress out of the water all dripping, and since everything was wet, we rested for two days and dried by lighting fires.
morin i wahan wehe de nijarabufi jakanafi niyaki tucime ambula waliyaha	Because the horses' hooves had been grinding on the rocky terrain, they had cracked open, pus was oozing out, and many died.
lifakv bime wehe jugvn hon ehe	The swampy and rocky terrain make the road extremely difficult.
beise jakvn gvsa de juwe tanggv cuwan dendeme bufi	the Beise distributed 200 boats to the Eight Banners.
tere olhon de genere hontoho cooha cuwan bahara niyalma muke be genekini seme selgiyehe	He ordered half of the troops to proceed by land, and those who had been given the boats to travel by river.
beise booi niru ambasa cuwan eleme gaifi turime	The Beise, bondservant company, and high officials obtained boats in surplus and rented them out.
janggin cooha ambula cuwan turifi muke be juraka	Officers and soldiers hired a great number of boats and set off by water.
ice sunja de bi ilan cuwan baifi cuwan giyan be jurafi	On the fifth, I found three boats and set off by river.
wasihvn muke eyen turgen	The downstream current was very fast
ice nadan de mukei eyen hahi	On the seventh the river current was fast
ice jakvn de muse emu tanggv jakvnju ba yabufi iliha	On the eighth we stopped after 180 li.
tuwaci alin i fiyeleku hada den dehi da funcembi	Observing, the mountains' cliffs and peaks, they were over 40 da high
cang de fude isinjifi  cuwan halame ilan inenggi indehe	reached the prefectural city of Changde, and rested for three days in order to change the boats
bi ubu i ice cuwan gaiha akv	I did not obtain a share of new boats.
juwan ilan de muse jurafi	We set off on the thirteenth
tuwaci musei coohai boo musei coohai tatan manju booi adali uce fa sindahabi	Looking at them, our troops' dwellings and army tents were fitted with doors and windows, just like Manchu houses.
ging jeo yuwan jeo i siden muke hahi bime hargi turgen ambula sengguwecuke	The currents between Jingzhou and Yuanzhou are strong, and the fast rapids are terribly frightening.
wasihvn muke eme minggan ninggun tanggv susai ba funcembi	The water flows downstream for over 1,650 li.
inenggidari efime sain jaka jeme bi damu boode genembi seme urgunjembi	Playing every day, eating good food, I rejoiced to be just going back home.
ninggun biyai orin de ashan i da foron wesimbufi coohai edelehe juwan ilan biyai ciyanliyang duin biyai orho liyoo be faitaha turgunde jakvn gvsai gabsihiyan bayara aliha cooha gemu beise de habxaha	On the twentieth of the sixth month, after a memorial submitted by the Sub-Chancellor of the Grand Secretariat Foron, because the soldiers' overdue salary of thirteen months and forage payment of four months were forfeited, the Eight Banners' Vanguard, Guards and Cavalry regiments all complained to the Beise.
meni tehe boo gemu mukede gaibuhabi	The houses where we had been staying were all swept away by the water.
kubuhe lamun gemu cuwan jafafi aciha tebufi tehe boo mukede gaibuha turgun be bi beise de alafi	After the Bordered Blue Banner got hold of all the boats, and luggage had been loaded, I told the Beise how the houses where we were billeted had been destroyed by the flood.
tere amargi guwali i loosa turire diyan i irgen i boo be gaifi gurifi tataha	he took the houses of innkeepers that Loosa had rented in the northern suburbs, and after they moved we lodged there.
boo gaire de beise burakv ofi cooha gemu maikan arafi menggun tucibufi boo aranuha	At the moment of assigning billets, the Beise did not give [them] any. Because of this, all the troops had to set up their tents, and paid to build their houses.
bi inu boo araha	I also built a house.
jakvn biyai ice juwe de gvsai ejen gargan sei sunja ci meyen i cooha isinjiha	On the second of the eighth month the soldiers of the fifth squadron under Lieutenant-general Gargan arrived.
orin i dobori	On the night of the twentieth
muke olhon be generengge gvnin cihangga sonjokini	Those going by water or land were to be selected according to personal preference.
tere boihon mutubume araha terkin de dobofi	he made offerings on top of a terrace made of stamped earth.
tere tu de hengkileme burdeme wecefi yali be umbuha	he performed the sacrificial ceremony prostrating himself and blowing the conch in front of the standard, then buried the flesh.
jakvnju ba yabufi ing iliha	set up camp after having covered 80 li
wehe be mini morin i wahan forofi ejehebi	The hoof of my horse carved the rock to make a record.
giyang ni dalin de jifi bi bai hafan de cuwan be baicame gaifi	Once I reached the bank of the river, at the local officials', I inspected and requisitioned the boats.
mini morin aciha be cuwan de tebufi bira doofi	I loaded my horses and luggage on a boat and crossed the river
jai inenggi amba cooha isinjifi juwe inenggi bira dooha	The next day the bulk of the army arrived, and it took two days to cross the river.
ereci julesi gurgu elgiyen	From there onwards beastes were plentiful.
tuwaci alin ajige alarame ba necin	one can see low hills surrounded by plains.
ambasa cooha geme hengkilehe tere de menggun buhe	All the high officials and soldiers prostrated and made offerings of silver to it.
bi hengkilefi bei bithe be tuwaha	I prostrated and then observed a stelae inscription.
coohai urse balai niyamniyara de juwan funceme uksin kutule gabtabuha	The rank and file soldiers were shooting arrows in a careless manner, and hit over ten armored soldiers and servants.
juwe uksin bucehe be beidefi beye hvda bubuhe	Two armored soldiers died. We judged the case and a monetary compensation was paid for the bodies.
emu inenggi ududu morin gabtabumbi	In a single day many horses were shot.
mini dolo geleme gvnime	In my heart I was frightened and pondered
bi juwan aniya afame yabufi funcehe ergen dain de gaibuhakv	I have served on a military campaign for ten years, and my life has not been taken by battle
ere niyamniyame bahanarakv coohai urse de guweke seme bi olhoxome	I must be careful to avoid those soldiers who are incapable of shooting from horseback.
juwan ilan de muse jakvnju sunja ba yabufi boo an i be dulefi ing iliha	On the thirteenth we proceeded for 85 li, passed Bao'anyi and then set up camp.
emu tanggv dehi ba yabufi muse irgen i boode tataha	After proceeding for 140 li, we stopped at the house of local people.
jakvnju ba yabufi diyan fang de tataha	lodged at an inn after having covered 80 li.
tubade bi maikan arafi tataha	There I pitched my tent.
eyen udu turgen seme ambula olhocuka ba akv	although the current was fast, there were no terribly frightening places.
bai hafan de bi cuwan be baicame gaifi	At the local officials' I inspected the boats and requisitioned them.
muse orin sunja ba yabufi ing iliha	We proceeded for 25 li and set up camp.
bi dobori amgaci ojorakv booi baita be fonjiha	I was not able to sleep at night, and asked about family affairs.
miyoo i boigon i oren de bi hengkilefi ing iliha	After kneeling in front of the earthen statue of the temple, I set up the camp.
gemu morin akv niyalma de hvsun gaisu seme	It was ordered to give the strong ones to the people without horses
mini beye dobori dulime baicafi dendeme jakvn gvsa de buhe	I myself stayed up at night to supervise, and to distribute among the Eight Banners.
amba age si aibici jihe	Big brother, where do you come from?
te absi genembi	Now where are you going?
bi gemun hecen i baru genembi	I'm going to Beijing (the capital)
bi ere biya ice de juraka	I departed at the beginning of this month
si ere biya ice de jurafi te hontohon biya hamika bime ainu teni ubade isinjiha	You departed at the beginning of this month, now it has been almost half a month, why have you just arrived here?
ere uthai tere gucu inu	This is that very friend.
sikse teni jihe	He came just yesterday.
abka gosifi beye elhe oci isinambi dere	If Heaven has mercy on us, and our bodies are sound, we will arrive.
si coohiyan i niyalma kai	You are a Korean person
geli ai xolo de nikan i gisun be mujakv sain i taciha	what free time do you have to learn Chinese language so well?
bi daci nikan i niyalma de bithe taciha be dahame	Because I read books with a Chinese person from China
nikan i gisun be majige bahanambi	I'm able to know a little Chinese language.
si wede bithe taciha	Who did you read books with?
bi nikan i tacikv de bithe taciha	I read books in a Chinese school in China
si ai jergi bithe be taciha	Which grades of books did you read?
ai bithe be giyangnambi	What books does he explain?
si tere nikan i bithe be tacifi ainambi	Why do you learn Chinese language?
meni ama eniye taci sehe kai	Our father and mother asked me to learn.
inenggidari nikan i xusai emgi emu bade tefi bithe taciha turgunde majige bahanambi	Because I live together with a young scholar of China in one place, I understand a little.
sini sefu ainara niyalma	What sort of person is your teacher?
nikan i niyalma	Chinese Person of China
se udu oho	How many years old?
meni sefu daci nomhon ofi umesi sithvme tacibumbi	Our teacher is docile and quiet from the beginning, he applies himself very much to teaching.
suweni geren xusai dorgi de nikan i niyalma udu coohiyan i niyalma udu	How many Chinese people are there in your crowd of students? How many Korean people?
nikan coohiyan tob seme emu dulin	Chinese and Korean each just one half.
terei dorgi de inu ehe ningge bio	Do there exist bad ones in them too?
amba age si te absi genembi	Big brother, now where are you going?
bi inu gemun hecen i baru genembi	I'm also going to Beijing (the capital)
bi coohiyan i niyalma nikan i bade feliyeme urehe akv	I'm a Korean person, I don't walk with familiarity in places of China
bi sini emgi gucu arame geneci antaka	How about that I can be your friend and go together with you?
uttu oci sain kai muse sasari yoki dere	This is very well, we should go together!
age sini hala ai	What is your clan/family name?
mini hala wang	my family name is king/wang
si gemun hecen de ai baita bifi genembi	Because of what affiars are you going to the capital (Beijing)
tuttu oci umesi sain	If so, that would be good.
age si daci yabuha niyalma	Big brother you are a well traveled person
gemun hecen i morin hvda antaka	How's the horse price in Beijing (the capital city)?
jakan mini takara niyalma jifi hendurengge	Recently someone I know came to tell me.
morin hvda ere ucuri sain	The horse price this time is good.
ere emu jergi morin tofohon yan salimbi	This grade of horse is worth fifteen tael/ounce.
ere emu jergi morin juwan yan salimbi sere	This grade of horse is worth ten tael/ounce.
jodon hvda duleke aniya i hvda emu adali sere	The price of grass cloth is the same as the past year's.
uttu oci bi duleke aniya gemun hecen de bihe hvda emu adali	If that's the case, it's the same as the price when I was in Beijing (the capital city) last year.
muse enenggi dobori aibide dedume genembi	Where do we go to lie down and sleep tonight?
ubaci gemun hecen de isinarangge udu ba bi	How many chinese miles are there from here to Beijing (the capital city)
ubaci gemun hecen de isinarangge amba muru sunja tanggv ba funcembi	There are about more than five hundred chinese miles in rough estimate from here to Beijing (the capital city).
muse genefi aibide tataci sain	Where is a good place for us to go and make camp?
sini hendurengge inu mini mujilen de inu uttu gvnihabi	What you said is correct, my mind also thought so.
bi inu duleke aniya tubade tataha bihe umesi sain	I also lived there last year, it's very nice.
ere morin i okson antaka	How is the pace of this horse?
si unenggi tubade genefi hvdaxaci majige aisi bio	You truly go there to do business. Is there a bit interest or profit?
muse taka sula gisun be nakaki	We should stop the casual talk temporarily
yasai juleri ere uthai wase diyan	This place in front of our eyes is a hotel/inn.
ara boihoji age boode bi kai	Wow, the master brother is at home
goidame acahakv bihe	We haven't met for a long time
suweni geren gucu aibici acafi jihe	Where do your group of friends come from?
be jugvn i unduri ishunde acafi gucu arame gemun hecen de genembi	We met along the way and made friends to go to Beijing (the capital city) together.
boihoji dengjan dabufi gaju	Master, light a lamp and bring it
duleke aniya ci ebsi abka hiya ofi usin jeku bargiyahakv aniya haji	Since last year, because of the dry weather, the grain in the field harvested is scarce.
be damu morin be boxome genere de	We only go and drive a few horses.
meni ubade duleke aniya ninggun biya de	In June (the sixth month) of last year, at our place.
emu anda jumanggi de emu kiyan hooxan be tebufi	A friend carried a paper in a bag.
booi jasigan tumen yan i aisin salimbi	A letter from home is worth ten thousand liang of gold.
coko hvlaha manggi ilifi uthai yabuki	Let us wake up and immediately leave after the cock crows.
coko ilanggeri hvlafi abka gereme hamika	The cock has crowed three times and the sky has almost become bright.
suweni geren xusai dorgi de nikan i niyalma udu coohiyan i niyalma udu	Among your many classmates, how many are Chinese and how many are Korean?
tere booi amala hvcin bi	There is a well behind that house.
niyalma hetu ulin be baharakv oci bayan ojorakv sehebi	A man that doesn't get unexpected property cannot be called rich.
bi yali colame bahanarakv	I don't know how to stir-fry meat.
ere yali urehe si amtalame	This meat is done, you should try it
